Connect: Fix and improve connection strings (#151)
crate/crate-clients-tools: docs/connect/index.md

:padding: 0

:::{grid-item}
:columns: 4
:margin: 0
:padding: 0

**Connection properties**

:Host: `<clustername>`.cratedb.net
:Port: 5432 (PostgreSQL) or<br>4200 (HTTP)
:User: `<username>`
:Pass: `<password>`

:::

:::{grid-item}
:columns: 8
:margin: 0
:padding: 0

**Connection-string examples**

A native PostgreSQL connection string, e.g. for `psql`.
<br>

> `postgresql://<username>:<password>@<clustername>.cratedb.net:5432/`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`postgresql://<username>:<password>@<clustername>.cratedb.net:5432/crate`
```

I think some applications might require a database name or fall back to e.g. `public`

Author: Do you think this is also applicable for the JDBC variant? I can find two spots here, one adds the `/crate` suffix, the others don't.

- https://github.com/crate/cratedb-examples/blob/main/application/apache-kafka-flink-streaming/flink_consumer.py#L22
- https://github.com/crate/cratedb-flink-jobs/blob/main/src/main/java/io/crate/streaming/TaxiRidesStreamingJob.java#L37-L42
- https://github.com/crate/pre-sales/blob/master/Flink/LongshoremanFlink/src/main/java/io/crate/longshoreman/MongoToCrateJob.java#L36-L38

Author: Do you have any ideas if `/crate` (or even `/doc`?) MUST be used as the `path` fragment of a connection URI when connecting with vanilla pgJDBC and/or CrateDB JDBC, @surister or @kneth?

What do you suggest to display on the canonical documentation spot?

Author: The canonical example exercising both drivers [cratedb-examples://by-language/java-jdbc](https://github.com/crate/cratedb-examples/tree/main/by-language/java-jdbc) doesn't use any path suffix, so I guess it will be good enough to also omit it on the documentation?

-- https://github.com/crate/cratedb-examples/blob/main/by-language/java-jdbc/Makefile

Reviewer: Nothing is "required" other then `jdbc:postgresql:`

https://github.com/pgjdbc/pgjdbc?tab=readme-ov-file#building-the-connection-url

Author: On another note, if I can find the space, I may add another (foot)note about this detail you educated me about. There, information about how to address a _database schema_, might be sensible. In SQLAlchemy, it is by using the `?schema=` URL parameter, but I don't actually know whether and how this works for crash, or JDBC.

Author: That's two more samples by @kneth:

- ["jdbc:crate://localhost:5432/", connectionProps](https://github.com/kneth/CrateJDBCTestbed/blob/3e86de5/app/src/main/java/cratejdbcexperiments/App.java#L18)
- ["jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/doc?user=crate"](https://github.com/kneth/CrateJDBCTestbed/blob/3e86de5/app/src/main/java/cratejdbcexperiments/App.java#L33)

Author: That's two more connection string samples by @kneth:

- ["jdbc:crate://localhost:5432/", connectionProps](https://github.com/kneth/CrateJDBCTestbed/blob/3e86de5/app/src/main/java/cratejdbcexperiments/App.java#L18)
- ["jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/doc?user=crate"](https://github.com/kneth/CrateJDBCTestbed/blob/3e86de5/app/src/main/java/cratejdbcexperiments/App.java#L33)

Author: It looks like the `/path` suffix is currently also interpreted as the addressed _schema_, and seems to work reasonably well when used with `psql`?

By default, CrateDB has a built-in catalog `crate`, and a default schema `doc`, right? That's why addressing an unknown schema `foo` fails with a corresponding error message.
```
$ psql "postgresql://crate@localhost:5432/foo" -c "\d"
ERROR:  Schema 'foo' unknown
```

Now, when populating existing and non-existing schemas with tables, like:
```shell
psql "postgresql://crate@localhost:5432/" -c "CREATE TABLE crate.crate (id INT);"
psql "postgresql://crate@localhost:5432/" -c "CREATE TABLE doc.doc (id INT);"
psql "postgresql://crate@localhost:5432/" -c "CREATE TABLE foo.foo (id INT);"
```
... **all of them** can be addressed well, by means of the `/path` suffix to the connection string URI.
```shell
psql "postgresql://crate@localhost:5432/crate" -c "\d"
psql "postgresql://crate@localhost:5432/doc" -c "\d"
psql "postgresql://crate@localhost:5432/foo" -c "\d"
```

Author: Coming from all those observations, I guess this one should be the canonical connection string to advertise, for both `psql` and JDBC use, effectively using `/doc` instead of `/crate`, on both of them. Let me know if you have any objections, because I may still got something wrong. Thanks!

```
postgresql://crate@localhost:5432/doc
```

Author: > The canonical example exercising both drivers [cratedb-examples://by-language/java-jdbc](https://github.com/crate/cratedb-examples/tree/main/by-language/java-jdbc) doesn't use any path suffix, so I guess it will be good enough to also omit it on the documentation, for the JDBC/Flink cases?
>
> ```shell
> mvn exec:java -Dexec.args="--dburl 'jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/'"
> mvn exec:java -Dexec.args="--dburl 'jdbc:crate://localhost:5432/'"
> ```

I've just exercised it also with the JDBC rig, and the behaviour is the same: The `/path` suffix selects the target _schema_ in CrateDB. When omitted, the vanilla pgJDBC driver will use the username as default, like @proddata mentioned about DBeaver, while the CrateDB JDBC driver will use `doc` by default.

Taking this into consideration, I think the safest way is to **always** tuck `/doc` onto the advertised connection URIs, in order to minimize confusion.

Author: Too much augmented by a layout change to sensibly decipher anything from that, a40687633b now uses the `doc` schema everywhere.

Author: Going to resolve this. Let me know if you have anything to add.

> A connection string for JDBC or Apache Flink.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A connection string for CrateDB JDBC Driver, e.g. for Apache Flink.
```

**Connection-string examples**

A native PostgreSQL connection string.
`postgresql://<username>:<password>@<clustername>.cratedb.net/`

A connection string for SQLAlchemy or Apache Flink.

> `crate://<username>:<password>@<clustername>.cratedb.net/?ssl=true`

Reviewer: Afaik this is SQL Alchemy specific and not necessarily works that way for Flink

Author: a) Ah right.
b) You are right. We need to discriminate here.

Thanks!

Author: 7f16fd14d48f278 intends to improve the situation in this regard.

**Connection-string examples**

A native PostgreSQL connection string.

> `postgresql://crate@localhost:5432/crate`

Author: Do you think it is a good measure to slap the "Blocked by CrateDB" label onto the root issue, in order to increase awareness?

- https://github.com/crate/crate/issues/13472

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8fcf67fa-e43b-47f9-b5c1-43ab9d5f1930)

```{tip}
- CrateDB's fixed catalog name is `crate`, the default schema name is `doc`.
- CrateDB does not implement the notion of a database,
  however tables can be created in different [schemas].
- When asked for a *database name*, specifying a schema name (any),
  or the fixed catalog name `crate` may be applicable.
- If a database-/schema-name is omitted while connecting,
  the PostgreSQL drivers may default to the "username".
- The predefined [superuser] on an unconfigured CrateDB cluster is
  called `crate`, defined without a password.
- For authenticating properly, please learn about the available
  [authentication] options.

> ```

Author: ### Reply
>> Tools like DBeaver will default to your username as "database" name. In CrateDB this currently sets your searchpath to username. Do you want that?
>
> This is certainly not intended, [...] improving the documentation [makes sense]. 

Thanks again. Within the "Tip" section below, I've added this item:
> - If a database-/schema-name is omitted while connecting,
>   the PostgreSQL drivers may default to the "username".

### Report
There have been a few more updates to this section, aiming to compress relevant details about those matters into a single spot.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a85b8af3-6a6c-4f63-8612-e3087f51da2a)
-- [Connect » Configure](https://crate-clients-tools--151.org.readthedocs.build/en/151/connect/index.html#configure)

**Please let us know if you can think of any other items missing, or if existing ones need to improve.**

Author: We compiled those details based on a few empirical exercises, and your advises.

**Please let us know if you can think of any other items missing, or if existing ones need to improve.**

Author: I guess it will not harm to merge this. Please let me know about any improvements and wished also in retrospective. Thanks for your valuable support so far!
